"A Mess O'Trouble" user variablesBy RayDunakin@aol.com11/28/95This is a list of all the user-designated variables in my shareware adventure game, A Mess O'Trouble, version 1.5.1. This list will make it easier to study the code in the game. For convenience, you should print out a copy. Please not that some possible variables were not used. Unused variables are not included in the list.A1 -- I used this variable to hold randomly selected numbers. In some scenes I could just use the value given to A1 in a previous action. In other cases, I assigned a random number to A1 for a specific action.A5 -- In one scene of the game, the player must find a specific directional command provided by clues in the game. After the player has found the command, the Menu is changed to include it. This variable was used to tell whether the player had found the command or not.A6 -- Used to keep track of conversation with a vendor.A7 -- Used to keep track of conversation with another vendor.A8 -- Is set when the player finds the object titled -K-. A9 -- Indicates whether or not the player has put acid into the object titled "cover".B1 -- Keeps track of conversation in Balcony Cafe.B2 -- Keeps track of activity at the apartment door.B3 -- Tracks conversation with Shek Varta in her apartment.B4 -- This variable has a bug! Do not use it!B5 -- Tracks conversation with Voidbeast village inhabitants.B6 -- Tracks conversation with waiter at Drop Inn.B9 -- Tracks attempts to remove the head of the statue in "Statue Room."C1 -- Used to alter the contents of the convention room sign.C2 -- Tracks additional conversation with Shek Varta.C3 -- Tracks conversation with innkeeper at Hard Rock Hotel.C6 -- Tracks activity when player returns lost child to apartment.C7 -- Tracks knocks at the door of the apartment.C8 -- Tracks number of times player has knocked on CDP symbol.C9 -- Tracks events during search of scene titled "More Cliffs."D1 -- Tracks conversations/actions involving secretary.D2 -- Tracks conversations/actions involving secretary.D3 -- Tracks conversations/actions involving secretary.D7 -- Tracks rescue of man in mine, adding text to journal in old house.D8 -- Tracks food supply in old house.D9 -- Tracks food that can be found in underwater cave.E1 -- Tracks text at the entry of the game.E2 -- Tracks power to elevator when circuit breaker is used.E3 -- Tracks use of the relay in elevator control panel.E4 -- Tracks direction of the elevator (up/down), to allow player to exit to the appropriate level.E9 -- Tracks use of Main Generator.F1 -- Tracks use of flashlight. When this reaches zero, the player must use new batteries.F2 -- Tracks which character the player has chosen. If variable is set to one, it means the player is using Fearless Frank. If it is set to two, it means the player is using Daredevil Dawn.F3 -- Is set when player first finds flashlight, to prevent it from being found in same place twice.F8 -- Tracks whether or not the form has been filled out.F9 -- Tracks whether or not form has been stamped.G2 -- Tracks speech of mocking lizard.G3 -- Tracks monitor during playback of recording in Pedestal Room.G4 -- Tracks sound/text of recording in Pedestal Room.G5 -- Tracks conversation at Trading Post.G7 -- Tracks conversation with guard in Monolith City.G8 -- Tracks player immunity to ghoulbat attacks.G9 -- Tracks attacks by ghoulbats.H1 -- Tracks player hunger. When this reaches zero, the player dies of starvation. If the player eats, it is reset.H2 -- Track player thirst. When this reaches zero, the player dies of thirst. If the player drinks, it is reset.H3 --  Tracks player's need to sleep. If this reaches zero, the player will fall asleep on the spot. Whenever the player sleeps, this is reset.H5 -- Tracks an "easter egg" that eliminates the player's need for food.H7 -- Tracks attempts to bribe waiter.H8 -- Tracks use of magic word at Frozen Fountain.H9 -- Tracks collection of honey from beehive.I1 -- Tracks sleep/dreams at Hard Rock Hotel.I2 -- Tracks sleep/dreams at Drop Inn.I6 -- Tracks conversation with Specter.I7 -- Tracks "easter egg" involving crate in mine.I8 -- Tracks "easter egg" involving holographic projection.I9 -- Tracks finding can under floor of leaning building when player is using Dawn.J1 -- Tracks contents of janitor's office.J2 -- Tracks conversation with janitor.J4 -- Tracks use of Data Editor.J5 -- Tracks electronic barrier to Character Generation Center.J6 -- Tracks barrier to Character Generation Center.J7 -- Tracks use of wire in slot of door in Crawlspace.J8 -- Tracks use of springs on feet.J9 -- Tracks finding pump handle in outhouse.K1 -- Tracks presence of Krabb at bio-gate.K2 -- Tracks lock on valve horn at Horned Ridge.K3 -- Tracks lock on valve horn at Rugged Area.K4 -- Tracks lock on valve horn at Spiny Ridge.K5 -- Tracks lock on valve horn at Gnarled Area.K6 -- Tracks blood pressure to bio-elevator, via valve horns.K7 -- Tracks orchid in player's possession and makes Krabb follow player.L2 -- Tracks door lock on HRH Room 2.L3 -- Tracks door lock on Drop Inn room.L9 -- Tracks use of wheels to open door at Tiled Emblem.M1 -- Tracks whether or not player is carrying rescued man in mine.M2 -- Tracks exit created by using Macintosh (in the game).M3 -- Tracks conversation with Mac.M4 -- Tracks whether or not disk is in Mac.M5 -- Tracks whether or not Mac is plugged in.M6 -- Tracks whether or not the power is turned on for the electromagnet.M7 -- Tracks player's first visit to Roost, so the correct scene text will be printed.M8 -- Tracks whether or not player is wearing barfallo hide.M9 -- Tracks whether or not player is wearing barfallo mask.N1 -- Tracks whether or not bait is on hook.N2 -- Tracks whether or not hook is on pole.N3 -- Tracks use of fruit in the fish.N4 -- Tracks cabinet lock.N5 -- Tracks presence of special food supply in Void Ruins.N6 -- Tracks latch on secret panel in Narrow Room.N7 -- Tracks actions involving the knob on the trunk in the Crushed Ruins.N8 -- Tracks use of oilcan.O1 -- Tracks pistol shots at leech.O2 -- Tracks putting egg in the pitcher.O3 -- Tracks putting hormones in the pitcher.O4 -- Tracks putting spores in the pitchet.O5 -- Tracks formula contents of pitcher.O6 -- Tracks finding Tix.O7 -- Tracks meeting with Phlea.O8 -- Tracks vial when dropped.O9 -- Tracks vial when dropped.P1 -- Tracks use of password to enter President's office.P2 -- Used to determine whether or not the custom menu should be used in the Palm Trees scene.P3 -- Tracks whether or not the player has modified the platter to fit in the gear box.P7 -- Tracks conversation with the oak tree.P8 -- Tracks conversation with the sentry.P9 -- Tracks movement of the Express Pod (up/down) to allow player to exit to the correct level.Q1 -- Tracks conversation with Vet.Q2 -- Tracks other conversations in Voidbeast village.Q3 -- Tracks other conversations in Voidbeast village.Q4 -- Tracks conversation at Drop Inn.Q5 -- Tracks additional conversation with Vet.Q9 -- Tracks text at endgame.R1 -- Tracks appearance of packrat.R2 -- Tracks conversation with old timer about trapped man.R3 -- Tracks conversation with man trapped in mine.R4 -- Tracks dream in metal shack involving rock.R5 -- Tracks when packrat poster has been read.R9 -- Tracks discovery of rod.S1 -- Tracks which notes have been played when ball is clicked inside horn.S2 -- Tracks creation of antidote.S3 -- Tracks viewscreen activity in dome.S4 -- Tracks spread of poison spots on Voidbeast.S5 -- Tracks use of bio-elevator at North Edge. S6 -- Tracks when player has read note hideen in Voidbeast's inner chamber.S7 -- Tracks conversation in Dim Hall scene.T1 -- Use to determine when player may enter trailer.T2 -- Used to keep track of old timer's greeting to player at trailer.T3 -- Keeps track of conversation in trailer.T7 -- Tracks purchase of theater ticket.T8 -- Tracks validity of tram pass.T9 -- Used to determine which scene the player has boarded the tram from.U1 -- Used to track actions involving text plus mouse clicks. Mainly in Pete's Treasure.U2 -- Tracks door lock in Upper Hall.U3 -- Tracks discovery of lost child.U4 -- Tracks discovery of passage under column.U5 -- Tracks directional conditions in fallen city ruins.U6 -- Tracks sequence of mouse clicks on symbols.U8 -- Tracks conversation about Shekcard at Antiquities Bureau.U9 -- Tracks conversation at Antiquities Bureau.V1 -- Tracks condition of sign at scene titled Sign.V2 -- Tracks appearance of vandals.V3 -- Tracks condition of Jump Doors in Monolith world.V4 -- Tracks condition of solar flare in Monolith world.V6 -- Tracks use of latch in Narrow Room.V8 -- Unknown. I forgot to write this one down and lost track of it.V9 -- Tracks player's presence in Void areas and operation of Void Ruins door.W1 -- Tracks contents of canteen.W2 -- Tracks use of water to clean meteor.W3 -- Tracks discovery of plate in water at Steel Barrier.W4 -- Tracks contents of underground tank.W7 -- Tracks conversation with Steven.W8 -- Tracks conversation with Usur.W9 -- Tracks condition of rope at well.X1 -- Tracks player's cash.X2 -- Tracks conversation with Cris.X3 -- Tracks conversation with Bermuda Shorts.X4 -- Tracks conversation with Utility worker.Y1 -- Tracks conversation with Destroyer.Y2 -- Tracks conversation with Protector.Y3 -- Tracks conversation with President.Y4 -- Tracks conversation with ticket scalper (shady character).Y5 -- Tracks Bunker recording dialogue.Y6 -- Tracks opening of Bunker secret panel.Y7 -- Tracks Special Room recording dialogue.Y8 -- Tracks meeting with ticket scalper.Y9 -- Tracks passage through unstable Jump Doors to prevent landing in areas before proper access is obtained.Z1 -- Tracks dreams in metal shack.Z2 -- Tracks dreams in Hard Rock Hotel.Z3 -- Tracks dreams in Main Room of old house.Z4 -- Tracks dreams in room at Drop Inn.Z5 -- Tracks dreams in Main Room of old house, involving Ray.